README.md, before:

# dfstool

Acorn DFS .ssd File Manager

## Commands

| Command      | Description                                                   |
| ------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `detokenize` | Detokenize BBC BASIC program                                  |
| `extract`    | Extract files and metadata from .ssd file                     |
| `make`       | Make .ssd file from files and metadata                        |
| `manifest`   | Generate a manifest file for the content in a given directory |
| `show`       | Show catalogue                                                |
| `tokenize`   | Tokenize BBC BASIC program                                    |
| `help`       | Print this message or the help of the given subcommand(s)     |

## Examples

Extract contents of a disc image `elite.ssd` into a directory name `elite` and
detokenize any BBC BASIC programs::

```bash
dfstool extract elite.ssd elite
```

Make a disc image named `elite-new.ssd` from the manifest file `elite/elite.ssd.json`
and referenced files:

```bash
dfstool make elite/elite.ssd.json elite-new.ssd
```

## Notes

`extract` does not preserve data in sectors that are not referenced by files
present in the catalogue, though it would be straightforward to modify it to
do so. `extract` and `make` do not currently losslessly roundtrip since
`make` stores files in the created .ssd file in alphabetic order by
directory/file name and does not retain the original start sector of each
file. Again, it would be straightforward to change this behaviour. `extract`
and `make` store file metadata in a JSON file which is used to reconstruct
the original DFS catalogue. The metadata tracks the following information:

* DFS directory and file name
* DFS locked attribute
* Load and execution addresses
* Inferred file type

`extract` will also attempt to detokenize any BBC BASIC files it finds along
the way.

By default, `detokenize` will generate "printable" output: i.e. only valid
printable ASCII characters will be present in the output and line endings
will be normalized to Unix-style LF line endings for ease of consumption in
modern text editors etc. "Lossless" mode can be specified with the
`--lossless` option which will retain all non-printable control characters
in the original file as well as using Acorn-style LFCR line endings
(mimicking the output generated by the `*SPOOL` command). Lossless format
can be used to retain the content of obfuscated BBC BASIC programs but must
be carefully edited (most likely as binary files) to retain the control
codes.

## The manifest

The manifest is a JSON file that describes the contents of an .ssd file in
terms of files on the current file system. Each file is described by a blob
of JSON that looks like the following:

```json
{
    "fileName": "!BOOT",
    "directory": "$",
    "discSide": 0,
    "locked": false,
    "loadAddress": "&000000",
    "executionAddress": "&000000",
    "contentPath": "!BOOT",
    "type": "other"
},
```

The fields are as follows:

* `fileName`: the DFS file name
* `directory`: the DFS directory
* `discSide`: the DFS disc side
* `locked`: the DFS "locked" attribute (`*ACCESS` etc.)
* `loadAddress`: the 18-bit DFS load address of the file
* `executionAddress`: the 18-bit DFS execution address of the file
* `contentPath`: the path to the file on the local file system relative
to the manifest---this must be a valid _local_ absolute or relative path
and is, therefore, not subject to DFS restrictions
* `type`: the file's type: this field is not used for anything when
making a new .ssd file but might be useful for something; this value is
inferred from the content of the file itself

The "DFS" attributes are those that were read from, or will be written to,
the .ssd file's DFS catalogue.

## TBD

* Support .dsd files
* Add a "roundtripping" mode (see comments in _Notes_) that would retain the
content of all sectors as well as the original order of catalogue entries
and start sectors

## References

* [Acorn DFS Disc Format][acorn-dfs-disc-format]
* [BBC BASIC Token Format][bbc-basic-token-format]
* [BBC BASIC Binary Line Number Format][bbc-basic-line-number-format]

## Licence

[MIT License](LICENSE)

[acorn-dfs-disc-format]: https://beebwiki.mdfs.net/Acorn_DFS_disc_format
[bbc-basic-line-number-format]: https://xania.org/200711/bbc-basic-line-number-format
[bbc-basic-token-format]: https://www.bbcbasic.net/wiki/doku.php?id=format

Commit message:

Optionally generate .inf files instead of storing metadata in manifest

README.md, after:

# dfstool

Acorn DFS .ssd File Manager

## Commands

| Command      | Description                                                   |
| ------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `detokenize` | Detokenize BBC BASIC program                                  |
| `extract`    | Extract files and metadata from .ssd file                     |
| `make`       | Make .ssd file from files and metadata                        |
| `manifest`   | Generate a manifest file for the content in a given directory |
| `show`       | Show catalogue                                                |
| `tokenize`   | Tokenize BBC BASIC program                                    |
| `help`       | Print this message or the help of the given subcommand(s)     |

## Examples

Extract contents of a disc image `elite.ssd` into a directory name `elite` and
detokenize any BBC BASIC programs::

```bash
dfstool extract elite.ssd elite
```

Make a disc image named `elite-new.ssd` from the manifest file `elite/elite.ssd.json`
and referenced files:

```bash
dfstool make elite/elite.ssd.json elite-new.ssd
```

## Notes

`extract` does not preserve data in sectors that are not referenced by files
present in the catalogue, though it would be straightforward to modify it to
do so. `extract` and `make` do not currently losslessly roundtrip since
`make` stores files in the created .ssd file in alphabetic order by
directory/file name and does not retain the original start sector of each
file. Again, it would be straightforward to change this behaviour. `extract`
and `make` store file metadata in a JSON file which is used to reconstruct
the original DFS catalogue. The metadata tracks the following information:

* DFS directory and file name
* DFS locked attribute
* Load and execution addresses
* Inferred file type

`extract` will also attempt to detokenize any BBC BASIC files it finds along
the way.

By default, `detokenize` will generate "printable" output: i.e. only valid
printable ASCII characters will be present in the output and line endings
will be normalized to Unix-style LF line endings for ease of consumption in
modern text editors etc. "Lossless" mode can be specified with the
`--lossless` option which will retain all non-printable control characters
in the original file as well as using Acorn-style LFCR line endings
(mimicking the output generated by the `*SPOOL` command). Lossless format
can be used to retain the content of obfuscated BBC BASIC programs but must
be carefully edited (most likely as binary files) to retain the control
codes.

## The manifest

The manifest is a JSON file that describes the contents of an .ssd file in
terms of files on the current file system. Each file is described by a blob
of JSON that looks like the following:

```json
{
    "fileName": "!BOOT",
    "directory": "$",
    "discSide": 0,
    "locked": false,
    "loadAddress": "&000000",
    "executionAddress": "&000000",
    "contentPath": "!BOOT",
    "type": "other"
},
```

Metadata can also be stored in .inf files. These can be created using
the `--inf` option passed to the `extract` command. The `make` and
`manifest` commands will also import .inf files if when provided.

The fields are as follows:

* `fileName`: the DFS file name
* `directory`: the DFS directory
* `discSide`: the DFS disc side
* `locked`: the DFS "locked" attribute (`*ACCESS` etc.)
* `loadAddress`: the 18-bit DFS load address of the file
* `executionAddress`: the 18-bit DFS execution address of the file
* `contentPath`: the path to the file on the local file system relative
to the manifest---this must be a valid _local_ absolute or relative path
and is, therefore, not subject to DFS restrictions
* `type`: the file's type: this field is not used for anything when
making a new .ssd file but might be useful for something; this value is
inferred from the content of the file itself

The "DFS" attributes are those that were read from, or will be written to,
the .ssd file's DFS catalogue.

## TBD

* Support .dsd files
* Add a "roundtripping" mode (see comments in _Notes_) that would retain the
content of all sectors as well as the original order of catalogue entries
and start sectors

## References

* [Acorn DFS Disc Format][acorn-dfs-disc-format]
* [BBC BASIC Token Format][bbc-basic-token-format]
* [BBC BASIC Binary Line Number Format][bbc-basic-line-number-format]

## Licence

[MIT License](LICENSE)

[acorn-dfs-disc-format]: https://beebwiki.mdfs.net/Acorn_DFS_disc_format
[bbc-basic-line-number-format]: https://xania.org/200711/bbc-basic-line-number-format
[bbc-basic-token-format]: https://www.bbcbasic.net/wiki/doku.php?id=format
